Since I have just committed an extremely radical restructuring of the menu
system, I think it fitting to document the reasoning behind everything I did.

Especially notable changes:

Several top level menus have been pulled down into other menus.  The Move and
Transport menus in the matrix and notation editors are mostly full of actions
I expect most people to do with toolbars or keyboard shortcuts.  They don't
rate a place on the top, and pulling them down reduces clutter.

The entire Studio has been pulled into the new Composition menu, and various
Composition-related items have been pulled out of Edit and into Composition.  All
Composition-related functions in the matrix/notation editors are on Composition now;
namely the tempo/time actions, which are indeed global to the document.

The notation editor has lost many top level menus, and actions that were once
scattered among three or maybe four different places are now categorized into
whether they Attach something to the note (ornaments, indications, ties,
slurs), or Adjust the note by physically altering it in some way (quantize,
transpose, tuplet (changes duration), stems, note styles).


The standard arrangement of menus is:

File Edit View Composition Segment [Extras] Tools Settings Help

Each top level menu has a specific purpose we should stick to as closely as
possible.  Generally they are:

File     - actions that affect file management, such as loading/saving,
           importing/exporting, and because it's the universal standard
	   location, printing

Edit     - actions that affect selections, such as select, cut, copy, paste, etc.

View     - actions that affect the current view

Composition - actions that affect the document globally and which are unique to
           the document, such as tempo/time, the entire Studio, and all the
	   document length/properties functions

Segments - actions that affect either the selected segment(s) or the segment
           actively being edited

Tools    - things like the various edit cursors, the local cursor control
           menus, the transport menus, and various other miscellany.

Settings - settings which affect Rosegarden globally, and the various
           toolbar/ruler toggles

Specific to the notation editor:

Notes   - these are actions that affect the visual appearance of a note
           without physically moving it or changing its duration in any way.

Adjust    - these are ideally to be actions that alter a note in a less
            superficial way; eg. transposing, interpreting, quantizing.  This
	    is also the home for tuplets, grace notes, note styles and stem
	    directions if for no better reason than to even some things out
	    between Notes and Adjust.  (There are a lot of gray areas still.)

History:

08-06-2004  D. Michael "Silvan" McIntyre	rev. 01
12-06-2004  D. Michael "Silvan" McIntyre	rev. 02
